Bb chapter 10 (#708)
mlr-org/mlr3book: book/chapters/chapter10/advanced_technical_aspects_of_mlr3.qmd

system.time({parSapply(cl, x, f, chunk.size = 2500)})
```

Whenever you have the option to control the granularity by setting the chunk size, you should aim for at least as many jobs as workers.
However, if there are too few job chunks with strongly dissimilar runtimes, the system may end up waiting for the last chunk to finish, while other ressources are idle.
This is referred to as `r index("synchronization overhead", aside = TRUE)`.

> You should therefore aim for chunks with a runtime of at least several seconds, so that the parallelization overhead remains reasonable, while still having enough chunks to ensures that you can fully utilize the system.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You should therefore aim for chunks with a runtime of at least several seconds, so that the parallelization overhead remains reasonable, while still having enough chunks to ensure that you can fully utilize the system.
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<!-- FIXME: RS OUTPUT -->
```

If you have heterogeneous runtimes, you can consider grouping jobs so that the runtimes of the chunks are more homogeneous.
If runtimes can be estimated, then `r ref("batchtools::binpack()")` and `r ref('batchtools::lpt()')` are useful for chunking jobs.
If runtimes cannot be estimated, then it can be useful to randomize the order of jobs.

> It could otherwise happen that jobs are accidentally ordered by runtime, e.g. because they are sorted by a hyperparameter that has a strong influence on training time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Otherwise jobs could be accidentally ordered by runtime, for example because they are sorted by a hyperparameter that has a strong influence on training time.
```

However, `r ref_pkg("future")` ensures that all workers will receive the same PRNG streams, independent of the number of workers (@future119).
Therefore, `mlr3` experiments will be reproducible as long as you use `set.seed` at the start of your scripts (with the PRNG of your choice).
:::

### Parallelization of Learners {#sec-parallel-learner}

At the lowest level, external code can be parallelized if available in underlying implementations.
For example, while fitting a single decision tree, each split that divides the data into two disjoint partitions requires a search for the best cut point on all $p$ features.
Instead of iterating over all features sequentially, the search can be broken down into $p$ threads, each searching for the best cut point on a single feature.
These threads can then be scheduled depending on available CPU cores, as there is no need for communication between the threads.
After all the threads have finished, the results are collected and merged before terminating the threads.
The $p$ best-cut points per feature are collected and aggregated to the single best-cut point across all features by iterating over the $p$ results sequentially.

:::{.callout-tip}

> ## GPU computation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## GPU Computation
```

lrn_ranger$param_set$values$num.threads
```

> To enable the parallelization for this learner, `mlr3` provides the helper function `r ref("set_threads()")`. It automatically adjusts the hyperparameters associated with builtin learner parallelization:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To enable the parallelization for this learner, `mlr3` provides the helper function `r ref("set_threads()")`, which automatically adjusts the hyperparameters associated with builtin learner parallelization:
```

  lrns(c("classif.featureless", "classif.rpart")), rsmp_cv3)

# enable parallelization
future::plan("multisession")

# run benchmark in parallel
bmr = benchmark(design)
```

See @sec-hpc-exec for larger benchmark experiments that may have a cumulative runtime of weeks, months or even years.

### Parallelization of Tuning {#sec-parallel-tuning}

Tuning is usually an iterative procedure, consisting of steps that are themselves embarrassingly parallel.
In each iteration, a tuner proposes a batch of hyperparameter configurations (which could be of size `1`), which can then be evaluated in parallel.

> After each iteration, a typical tuner adapts itself in some way based on the obtained performance values.
> Random and grid search are exceptions, since they do not choose configurations based on past results.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After each iteration, most tuners adapt themselves in some way based on the obtained performance values.
Random and grid search are exceptions as they do not choose configurations based on past results, instead, for these tuners, all evaluations are independent and can, in principle, be fully parallelized.
```

> For them, all evaluations are therefore independent and can, in principle, be fully parallelized.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> Otherwise, tuning can be regarded as iterative benchmarks, which is how it is implemented in `mlr3`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Tuning is implemented in `mlr3` as iterative benchmarks.
```

> The `r ref("Tuner")` proposes a batch of learners, each with a different configuration in its `$param_set$values`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `r ref("Tuner")` proposes a batch of learners, each with a different configuration in its `$param_set$values`, where the size of the batch can usually be controlled with the `batch_size` configuration parameter.
```

The size of this batch can often be controlled with a tuner's `batch_size` configuration parameter.

> This batch is then passed to `r ref("benchmark()")` together with the resampling strategy of the tuning instance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This batch is passed to `r ref("benchmark()")` with the resampling strategy of the tuning instance.
```

Since each call to `benchmark()` depends on previous results, it is generally not possible to parallelize tuning at a higher "level" than individual benchmarks.
Instead, the individual `benchmark()` evaluations are parallelized by `mlr3` in the same way as when benchmarks are run manually, without tuning.

> This has the benefit that the individual resampling iterations of each configuration being evaluated are all parallelized at the same time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This means that the individual resampling iterations of each evaluated configuration are all parallelized at the same time.
```

Therefore, to get full parallelization, make sure that the `batch_size`, multiplied by the number of resampling iterations, is at least equal to the number of available workers.
If you expect homogeneous runtimes, i.e., you are tuning over a single learner or pipeline without any hyperparameters with a large influence on the runtime, aim for a multiple of the number of workers.

> Note, however, that termination criteria are only checked between evaluations of batches.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In general, larger batches allow for more parallelization, while smaller batches imply a more frequent evaluation of the termination criteria.
Independently of whether you use parallelization, the termination criteria are only checked between evaluations of batches.
```

> This is the case even if parallelization is not used.
> In general, larger batches allow for more parallelization, while smaller batches imply a more frequent evaluation of the termination criteria.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

  lrns(c("classif.featureless", "classif.rpart")), rsmp_cv3)

# enable parallelization
future::plan("multisession")

# run benchmark in parallel

> bmr = benchmark(design)

Reviewer: @mb706 @berndbischl why is output suppressed here?

Reviewer 2: same comment as below for parallel preds

### Parallelization of Tuning {#sec-parallel-tuning}

Tuning is usually an iterative procedure, consisting of steps that are themselves embarrassingly parallel.

> In each iteration, a tuner proposes a batch of hyperparameter configurations -- in the worst case of size 1 -- which can then be evaluated in parallel.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In each iteration, a tuner proposes a batch of hyperparameter configurations (which could be of size `1`), which can then be evaluated in parallel.
```

After each iteration, a typical tuner adapts itself in some way based on the obtained performance values.
Random and grid search are exceptions, since they do not choose configurations based on past results.

> For them, all evaluations are therefore independent and can in principle be fully parallelized.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For them, all evaluations are therefore independent and can, in principle, be fully parallelized.
```

> Otherwise, tuning can be regarded as iterative benchmarks, which is also how `mlr3` implements it:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Otherwise, tuning can be regarded as iterative benchmarks, which is how it is implemented in `mlr3`.
```

The `r ref("Tuner")` proposes a batch of learners, each with a different configuration in its `$param_set$values`.
The size of this batch can often be controlled with a tuner's `batch_size` configuration parameter.
This batch is then passed to `r ref("benchmark()")` together with the resampling strategy of the tuning instance.

> Since each `benchmark()`-call depends on previous results, it is generally not possible to parallelize tuning at a higher "level" than individual benchmarks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since each call to `benchmark()` depends on previous results, it is generally not possible to parallelize tuning at a higher "level" than individual benchmarks.
```

Instead, the individual `benchmark()` evaluations are parallelized by `mlr3` in the same way as when benchmarks are run manually, without tuning.
This has the benefit that the individual resampling iterations of each configuration being evaluated are all parallelized at the same time.
Therefore, to get full parallelization, make sure that the `batch_size`, multiplied by the number of resampling iterations, is at least equal to the number of available workers.
If you expect homogeneous runtimes, i.e., you are tuning over a single learner or pipeline without any hyperparameters with a large influence on the runtime, aim for a multiple of the number of workers.
Note, however, that termination criteria are only checked between evaluations of batches.
This is the case even if parallelization is not used.
In general, larger batches allow for more parallelization, while smaller batches imply a more frequent evaluation of the termination criteria.

> The following code shows a parallelized execution of random search with the termination criterion set to 20 iterations and a moderate batch size, where 36 resampling splits -- 12 configurations of 3 splits each -- are evaluated in parallel on 4 workers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following code shows a parallelized execution of random search with the termination criterion set to 20 iterations and a moderate batch size, where 36 resampling splits -- 12 configurations of three splits each -- are evaluated in parallel on four workers.
```

The batch size, set to a multiple of the number of workers, ensures that available resources are used efficiently.
However, note that the tuning only terminates after a multiple of the given batch size, in this case after 24 evaluations.

```{r}
future::plan("multisession", workers = 4)

instance = tune(
  tnr("random_search", batch_size = 12),
  tsk("penguins"),
  lrn("classif.rpart", minsplit = to_tune(2, 128)),
  rsmp("cv", folds = 3),
  term_evals = 20
)

instance$archive$n_evals
```

> In this example, we could have increased the batch size to 20 (not having a multiple of 4, the number of workers, would not matter here, since we want to terminate after 20 configurations and are not worried about sub-optimal usage of workers).
> Due to the embarrassingly parallel nature of random search, this would have made use of available resources in the most efficient way while stopping exactly at the point we configured, i.e. after 20 evaluations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example, we could have increased the batch size to 20 to make use of available resources in the most efficient way while stopping exactly at the number of evaluations, however this does not generalize to other termination criteria where we do not know the number of evaluations in advance.
```

> However, for other termination criteria, such as `trm("perf_reached")`, which checks whether a sufficient performance value has already been reached, we would not know the number of evaluations beforehand and could not set the batch size accordingly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> For example, with a batch size of 12, if the first configuration of the batch would already yield better performance than the given threshold, the remaining 11 configurations would still be evaluated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, if we used `trm("perf_reached")` with a batch size of 12, then if the first configuration of the batch yielded better performance than the given threshold, the remaining 11 configurations would still be unnecessarily evaluated.
```

### Nested Resampling Parallelization {#sec-nested-resampling-parallelization}

Nested resampling can conceptually be parallelized at three different levels, each corresponding to jobs of different granularity:

1. The parallelization of the outer resampling.
  A job is then the tuning of a learner on the respective training set of the outer resampling splits.
2. The parallel evaluation of the batch of hyperparameter configurations proposed in one tuning iteration.
  A job is then, for example, the cross-validation of such a configuration.
3. The parallelization of the inner resampling in tuning.
  A job is then a train-predict-score step of a single configuration.

> This is also shown in Algorithm 3 from @hpo_practical, which is, in slightly simplified and conceptual form:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is demonstrated in the pseudocode below, which is a simplified form of Algorithm 3 from @hpo_practical:
```

```{r, eval = FALSE}
# outer resampling, level 1:
for (i in seq_len(n_outer_splits)) {
  tuning_inst = ti(...)  # tuning instance
  inner_task = get_training_task(task, outer_splits[[i]])
  # tuning loop, the details of which depend on the tuner being used
  # This does not correspond to a level:
  while (!tuning_inst$is_terminated) {
    proposed_points = propose_points(tuning_inst$archive, batch_size)
    # Evaluation of configurations, level 2:
    for (configuration in proposed_points) {
      split_performances = numeric()
      # Inner resampling, level 3:
      for (j in seq_len(n_inner_splits)) {
        split_performances[j] = evaluate_performance(
          learner, configuration, inner_task, inner_splits[[j]]
        )
      }
      performance = aggregate(split_performances)
      update_archive(tuning_inst$archive, configuration, performance)
    }
  }
  evaluate_performance(learner, tuning_inst$result, task, outer_splits[[i]])
}
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<!-- FIXME RS CHECK OUTPUT -->
```

> The pseudocode above is implemented in `mlr3` in a slightly more efficient variant.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The pseudocode above is implemented in `mlr3` in a slightly more efficient manner.
```

At the second level (the evaluation of configurations), it exploits the functionality of `benchmark()`: a learner is created for each proposed hyperparameter configuration and all learners are resampled in a benchmark experiment in the innermost for-loop, effectively executing the second level along with the third level on a finer granularity (number of proposed points times number of inner resampling iterations).
Hence, when parallelizing nested resampling in `mlr3`, the user has to choose between two options: parallelizing the outer resampling or the inner benchmarking.

By example, let us tune the `minsplit` argument of a classification tree using an `r ref("AutoTuner")` (@sec-autotuner) and random search with only two iterations.
Note that this is a didactic example to illustrate the interplay of the different parallelization levels and not a realistic setup.

> We use holdout for inner resampling and set the `batch_size` to 2, which yields two independent iterations in the inner benchmark experiment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We use holdout for inner resampling and set the `batch_size` to `2`, which yields two independent iterations in the inner benchmark experiment.
```

Below, we run the example sequentially without parallelization:

```{r technical-007}
library(mlr3tuning)
# reset to default sequential plan
future::plan("sequential")

lrn_rpart = lrn("classif.rpart",
  minsplit  = to_tune(2, 128))

lrn_rpart_tuned = auto_tuner(tnr("random_search", batch_size = 2), lrn_rpart,
  rsmp("holdout"), msr("classif.ce"), 2)

resample(tsk("penguins"), lrn_rpart_tuned,
  rsmp("cv", folds = 5))$aggregate()
```

We can now either opt to parallelize the outer CV or the inner benchmarking.
Let us assume we have a single CPU with four cores (C1 - C4) available and each inner holdout evaluation during tuning takes four seconds.
If we parallelize the outer five-fold CV (@fig-parallel-outer), each of the four cores  would run one outer resampling first, the computation of the fifth iteration has to wait as there are no more available cores.

```{r technical-009, eval = FALSE}
# Parallelize outer loop
future::plan(list("multisession", "sequential"))

# Alternative: skip specification of 2nd level, since future
# sets all levels after the first to "sequential" by default
future::plan("multisession")
```

This approach is illustrated in @fig-parallel-outer.

> Each of the four workers starts with the computation of a different inner benchmark, each of which runs sequentially and therefore takes 8 seconds on one worker.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each of the four workers starts with the computation of a different inner benchmark, each of which runs sequentially and therefore takes eight seconds on one worker.
```

lrn_rpart$train(tsk_sonar)

# set up parallel predict on four workers
future::plan("multisession", workers = 4)
lrn_rpart$parallel_predict = TRUE

# predict

> prediction = lrn_rpart$predict(tsk_sonar)

Reviewer 2: because this is a "totally technical" example where the results only waste space -- and do not inform the reader about anything. you really gain zero from them -- and the text does not comment on them

3. Train and predict with a `r index('fallback learner', aside = TRUE)` --  Instead of imputing with the worst possible score, we could train a baseline learner and make predictions from this model.

We strongly recommend the final option, which is statistically sound and can be easily used in any practical experiment.

> `mlr3` includes two baseline learners: `lrn("classif.featureless")`, which in its default configuration always predicts the majority class, and `lrn("regr.featureless")`, which predicts the average response by default.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`mlr3` includes two baseline learners: `lrn("classif.featureless")`, which, in its default configuration, always predicts the majority class, and `lrn("regr.featureless")`, which predicts the average response by default.
```

After getting this far in the book you are well on your way to being an `mlr3` expert and may even want to add more classes to our universe.
Whilst many classes could be extended, all have a similar design interface and so, we will only demonstrate how to create a custom `r ref("Measure")`.
If you are interested in implementing new learners, `PipeOp`s, or tuners, then check out the vignettes in the respective packages: `r mlr3extralearners`, `r mlr3pipelines`, or `r mlr3tuning`.

> If you are considering creating a package that adds an entirely new task type (next to regression, classification, survival etc.) then feel free to contact us for some support via GitHub, email, or Mattermost.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are considering creating a package that adds an entirely new task type then feel free to contact us for some support via GitHub, email, or Mattermost.
```

These are usually complex edge-cases examples, so we will not go into detail here, for working examples we suggest looking at the code for `r ref("mlr3proba::MeasureSurvSongAUC")` and `r ref("mlr3proba::MeasureSurvAUC")`.
You can also consult the manual page of the `Measure` for an overview of other properties and meta-data that can be specified.

> Once you have defined your measure you can load it with the `R6` constructor (`$new()`), or make it available to be constructed with the `msr()` shorthand by adding it to the `r ref("mlr_measures")` dictionary:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once you have defined your measure you can load it with the `R6` constructor (`$new()`), or make it available to be constructed with the `msr()` sugar function by adding it to the `r ref("mlr_measures")` dictionary:
```
